cl_khr_tensor extension (#2)
pjaaskel/OpenCL-Docs: ext/cl_exp_tensor.asciidoc

=== Overview

The new tensor object enables applications to describe N-dimensional

> arrays whose memory layout is abstract to applications. The goal and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
arrays whose memory layout is opaque to applications. The goals
```

> intent of this extension is to give leverage for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of this extension are the following:
```

> * implementations to have freedom of placement data of the tensors for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Enable implementations to have freedom of placement data of the tensors for
```

  improving performance of the kernels which use them. This extension

>   should be designed so it allows implementations to determine optimal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is designed such it allows implementations to determine optimal
```

  memory layouts for the tensors based on their use cases for

>   increasing performance - for example, by analyzing kernels’ access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  increased performance, by means of, for example, analyzing kernels’ access
```

>   patterns - or, in case of built-in kernels, by inspecting tensor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  patterns or, in case of built-in kernels, by inspecting the tensor
```

  arguments they operate on.

> * reduce details and boilerplate needed for porting performant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Reduce details and boilerplate needed for performance portable implementation of
```

  applications by being less dependent on platform or device specifics
  on the memory layout / data arrangements which matters for
  performance. Such specifics may include:

** alignment of data (e.g. for avoiding misaligned memory accesses)

** arrangement of data required by kernels (column-major vs row-major
   for matrix multiplication, NHWC vs NCHW for neural network
   convolution)

** arrangement of the data into tiles (or “packing”) for improving
   cache and TLB hits

** arrangement of data into specific tiles in order to exploit complex
   HW operations such as matrix multiplications (Intel AMX, AMD matrix
   cores).

** arrangement of data into rows separated by a stride in order to

>    avoid back conflicts in GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   avoid bank conflicts in GPUs.
```

> The tensor data type is deemed to be effective with command buffers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tensor data type is designed to be efficiently used together with command buffers (cl_khr_command_buffers)
```

> and built-in kernels - including kernels to be provided by defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and built-in kernels, including kernels to be provided by the Defined
```

> built-in kernel (cl_khr_defined_builtin_kernels) extension under work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Built-in Kernels (cl_khr_defined_builtin_kernels) extension that is being prepared together with this extension.

=== Modifications to OpenCL

==== New Section: 5.x Tensor Objects

> A tensor object stores a N-dimensional array of elements. The memory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A tensor object stores an N-dimensional array of elements. The memory
```

layout of the tensor is opaque to the application. When a tensor

> object is created it initially does not have storage where the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
object is created it is initially not associated to any storage for the tensor elements.
```

> elements of the tensor are stored into. A storage is bind to a tensor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 A storage is bound to a tensor
```

by creating a memory buffer with CL_MEM_BIND_TO_BUFFER. Tensor objects
without storage can be set as kernel arguments for kernels which

> accepts them. Kernels which have tensor arguments must have a storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
accepts them. Kernels which have tensor arguments must have storage
```

The elements of buffer object / host allocation are mapped to tensor
coordinates and vice versa as follows in pseudo C code:

[source,c]
----
tensor_element(
  tensor_origin[0] + i[0],
  tensor_origin[1] + i[1],
  ...,
  tensor_origin[N-2] + i[N-2],
  tensor_origin[N-2] + i[N-1]) ==
((TENSOR_DATATYPE *)buffer_or_host_ptr)[
  (mem_origin[0] + i[0]) * pitch(0) +
  (mem_origin[1] + i[1]) * pitch(1) +
  ... +
  (mem_origin[N-2] + i[N-2]) * pitch(N-2) +
  (mem_origin[N-1] + i[N-1])];
----

Where the `N` is tensor rank, the `i[X]` is a tensor coordinate with
inclusive range of `0..<region[X]-1>` and the `pitch` is computed as
follows in pseudo C code:

[source,c]
----
size_t pitch(size_t dim) {
  size_t pitch = 1;
  for (size_t i = dim; i < tensor_rank - 1; i++)
    pitch *= mem_pitch != NULL ? mem_pitch[i] : region[i + 1];
  return pitch;
}
----

For `dim` in `0..(tensor_rank()-1)`. The `tensor_element()` represents
an abstract function that accesses a tensor element in its storage at
given coordinate. The method how the coordinates translate to tensor
storage addresses is unspecified.

// TODO: add clEnqueueCopyTensor

// TODO: add clEnqueueFillTensor?

> TODO: add command buffer variants for clEnqueue*Tensor.

Reviewer: Perhaps do this still before sending the Khronos/OpenCL-Docs pull request?

given coordinate. The method how the coordinates translate to tensor
storage addresses is unspecified.

> *clEnqueueTranslateFsomTensor* and *clEnqueueTranslateToTensor*

Reviewer: Typo Fsom

Reviewer: Maybe import/export are even better word here instead of 'translate'?

Author: Fixed type and renamed.

* CL_INVALID_VALUE if any _region_ array element is 0.

* CL_INVALID_VALUE if _mem_pitch_ is not NULL and _mem_pitch_[i] is
  not 0 and _mem_pitch_[i] is less than _region_[i].

* CL_INVALID_VALUE if _buffer_ and _host_ptr_ both are NULL or non-NULL.

* CL_INVALID_EVENT_WAIT_LIST if _event_wait_list_ is NULL and
  _num_events_in_wait_list_ > 0, or _event_wait_list_ is not NULL and
  _num_events_in_wait_list_ is 0, or if event objects in
  _event_wait_list_ are not valid events.

* CL_EXEC_STATUS_ERROR_FOR_EVENTS_IN_WAIT_LIST if the read and write
  operations are blocking and the execution status of any of the
  events in _event_wait_list_ is a negative integer value.

* CL_MEM_OBJECT_ALLOCATION_FAILURE if there is a failure to allocate
  memory for data store associated with memory object the _tensor_ is
  bound to.

* CL_OUT_OF_RESOURCES if there is a failure to allocate resources
  required by the OpenCL implementation on the device.

* CL_OUT_OF_HOST_MEMORY if there is a failure to allocate resources
  required by the OpenCL implementation on the host.

// TODO: add clEnqueueCopyTensor

// TODO: add clEnqueueFillTensor?

> If *cl_khr_command_buffer* is is supported, then the following command

Reviewer: is is

Author: Fixed.

// Temporary tensors used in a command buffer can't be read or written
// into. A hypothetical reason is that the finalized command buffer
// might not use some of the tensor.
assert(clEnqueueTranslateFromTensor(..., t0, ...) == CL_INVALID_OPERATION);
----

=== Open Questions ===

. Should we have support for tensors with undefined shape and tensors
  with unknown / symbolic dimension sizes like in ONNX?
+
--
// https://onnx.ai/onnx/repo-docs/ShapeInference.html
*UNRESOLVED*
--

. Should we define OpenCL C language features for accessing tensors?
+
--
*RESOLVED*: OpenCL C support for tensors can be introduced later in a
            separate extension. Built-in kernels may benefit from this

>             extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            extension as it is.
```
